A.  Create your subgroup and project by logging into GitLab using the web link provided and using the “GitLab How-To” web link, and do the following:  Clone the project to the IDE.  Commit with a message and push when you complete each of the tasks listed below (e.g., parts B to E).Note: You may commit and push whenever you want to back up your changes, even if a task is not complete.  Submit a copy of the GitLab repository URL and a copy of the repository branch history retrieved from your repository, which must include the commit messages and dates. Note: Wait until you have completed all the following prompts before you create your copy of the repository branch history. B.  Design and develop a fully functional full stack (mobile or web) software product that addresses your identified business problem or organizational need. Include each of the following attributes, as they are the minimum required elements for the application:  code including inheritance, polymorphism, and encapsulation  search functionality with multiple row results and displays  a database component with the functionality to securely add, modify, and delete the data  ability to generate reports with multiple columns, multiple rows, date-time stamps, and title  validation functionality  industry-appropriate security features  design elements that make the application scalable  a user-friendly, functional GUI C.  Create each of the following forms of documentation for the software product you have developed:  a design document including a class diagram and design diagram  link to where the web app is hosted with HTML code (if applicable)  link to the GitLab repository of the code indicating the version included in this submission  user guide for setting up and running the application for maintenance purposes  user guide for running the application from a user perspective D.  Explain how the software product was tested, including the following:  a test plan for a unit test, including screenshots  unit test scripts  the results of the unit tests based on the provided test plan, including screenshots  summaries of changes resulting from completed tests E.  Provide a Panopto video recording that includes a demonstration of the functionality of the software application and a summary of the tool or tools used.