Name:Date:Course/Section:Password CrackingPart 1: Test Password SecurityVisit the following URL: https://lowe.github.io/tryzxcvbn/This website estimates the strength of passwords you enter.Passwords never leave your browser – if you are so inclined, youcan confirm as much by perusing the source code and/or byopening your browser developer tools and observing the script thatruns when you enter passwords.Try normal passwords like qwerty, password123, zxcvb andgodislove. How fast the website did guess the passwords?What algorithm/s did the website used to guess the passwords?Try one of your personal passwords. What is the result?Try creating a passphrase (ex. “Never gonna give you up” will beneg0g1youp). What passphrase have you created and what was theresult?Part 2: Check your Account for a Prior Data BreachCheck to see if one of your online accounts has already beenbreached.Visit: https://haveibeenpwned.com and type in one of your emailaccounts or usernames to see if it has already been compromised ina data breach.1a. Try your lpunetwork account. What was the result?1b. Try your personal email account. What was the result?Next visit: https://haveibeenpwned.com/Passwords and try outsome passwords to see if they have already been compromised in adata breach.2a. Try the password you’re using with your student account. Whatwas the result?2b. Try some of your personal passwords. What was the result?Part 3: Check for Sites/Systems which Support Two-FactorAuthenticationVisit: https://2fa.directory/ and check for the Banking category.Choose at least 3 and answer the following questions.What websites have you chosen? Write them below and give a shortsummary on what the website is about.In your own opinion, is it necessary for them to have two-factorauthentication? Why / Why not?Check for the Gaming category. Choose at least 3 and answer thefollowing questions.What websites have you chosen? Write them below and give a shortsummary on what the website is about.In your own opinion, is it necessary for them to have two-factorauthentication? Why / Why not?